(Advertising Effectiveness: The Moderating Effect of Firm Strategy, McAlister, Srinivasan, etc...)

focus on the link between financial outcomes and advertising expenditure, a key element of marketing spending

approaches for measuring advertising effectiveness

evaluative marketing metrics (e.g., sales, market share, profits, return on investment, cash flow, firm value). In this article, we focus on evaluative marketing metrics—in particular, sales and firm value—and consider the ways in which advertising might influence those metrics.

We hypothesize that advertising is linked to sales for all firms. However, advertising should be more strongly linked to firm value for a differentiator than for a cost leader because that differentiator has a point of difference that advertising can elaborate into brand equity. To test the hypotheses, we develop an indicator of a firm's source of competitive advantage that can be inferred from the firm's advertising expenditure disclosure behavior.

In what follows, we develop hypotheses relating the effectiveness of a firm's advertising to that firm's source of competitive advantage (differentiation vs. cost leadership).
We then present our proposed indicator of a firm's source of competitive advantage and give evidence consistent with that indicator being reliable and valid. We next test the hypotheses using our indicator, check the robustness of our findings, discuss the implications of this work and lay out further research questions to be explored.

Consequently, in this article, we will contrast the effectiveness of advertising done by firms that draw competitive advantage from differentiation with that of firms that draw competitive advantage from cost leadership.

Regarding advertising effectiveness, our review of the marketing literature suggests that two important evaluative measures of advertising effectiveness are (1) advertising's ability to increase current sales (e.g., Lodish et al. 1995) and (2) advertising's ability to increase both current and expected future sales (e.g., Joshi and Hanssens 2010). Because the discounted sum of expected future cash flows is closely related to the discounted sum of expected future sales, the second meaning of “advertising effectiveness” could be restated as “advertising's ability to increase firm value.”

We note that economists are divided on the question of whether advertising influences only current sales (advertising as information view) or whether it influences current and expected future sales (advertising as persuasion view).
The first view, which holds that advertising informs (e.g., Ozga 1960; Stigler 1961; Telser 1964), suggests that advertising increases current sales because advertising increases awareness (i.e., consumers cannot buy a product if they don't know that it exists). The second view holds that it is advertising's job to persuade consumers.

advertising influences the firm's current and expected future sales (for a summary of these findings, see Srinivasan and Hanssens 2009). Joshi and Hanssens (2010) support that contention by showing that (1) advertising increases sales in the current period, and those incremental sales increase firm value, and (2) when advertising's current-sales effect on firm value is controlled for, advertising has an additional impact on firm value that can be attributed to investors’ expectations that future sales will also increase.

we contend that advertising is effective for all firms because it increases sales.

To infer that a particular firm is a differentiator or a cost leader, we combine the insight that advertising is central to firm strategy for differentiators but not for cost leaders with information about advertising's strategic centrality for specific firms. If advertising is central to strategy for a firm, we infer that the firm is a differentiator. If advertising is not central to strategy for a firm, we infer that the firm is a cost leader.

To test the hypotheses, we consider two models of advertising effectiveness: advertising's ability to influence current-period sales and advertising's ability to influence firm value. For both current-period sales and firm value, we ask whether advertising's relationship with that variable is moderated by the firm's source of competitive advantage. In particular, Models 1 and 2 are as follows:


To control for firm effects, we consider (1) firm size, to control for economies of scope and scale in models of sales and firm value (Panzar and Willig 1977); (2) profits, in the firm value model, because they affect cash flows, which are a key input to shareholder value (Connolly and Hirschey 2005); and (3) leverage, which should provide capital needed to grow sales and should, through signaling (Myers and Majluf 1984) and cost of capital (Harris and Raviv 1991), affect shareholder value.
To control for industry effects in models of sales and firm value, we include as predictors the turbulence (Haleblian and Finkelstein 1993) and growth rate (McDougall et al. 1994) of the industry indicated by firm j's four-digit SIC code, which we expect to be positively related to firm value because the firm is likely to grow rapidly if the industry is growing rapidly. We include industry concentration (Hirschey and Weygandt 1985), which we expect will be positively related firm value because firms in concentrated industries have greater market power. Furthermore, because the central focus of our investigation is differentiation, we also control for the percentage of firms in the industry that draw competitive advantage from differentiation. We also include four-digit SIC code industry and year fixed effects and control for unobserved firm-specific effects.


General Discussion
In 2016, worldwide advertising spending is expected to be near $630 billion (McCarthy 2013). With so much money spent on advertising every year, managers place an understandable priority on determining the return for their advertising dollars. This article addresses that important problem by showing that a firm's fundamental business strategy moderates the effectiveness of its advertising. In particular, we hypothesize that advertising is related to sales for all firms but is more strongly related to firm value for differentiators than for cost leaders (because it is differentiation that allows advertising to create brand equity and intangible firm value).
To test these hypotheses, we first classified firms as drawing competitive advantage from either differentiation or cost leadership, on the basis of on their advertising expenditure disclosure behavior after accounting regulation FRR44 in 1994. Firms that continued disclosing advertising expenditure after FRR44 (indicating that their advertising is important) are classified as differentiators. Firms that ceased disclosing advertising expenditure after FRR44 (indicating that their advertising is not important) are classified as cost leaders.
Using advertising materiality as an indicator of a firm's source of competitive advantage (differentiation vs. cost leadership), we modeled the relationship between advertising share of voice and sales and the relationship between advertising share of voice and firm value. We found, as hypothesized, that advertising share of voice is related to sales for both firms that our indicator classifies as differentiators and those that our indicator classifies as cost leaders. However, advertising share of voice is more strongly related to firm value for firms that our indicator classifies as differentiators than for those that our indicator classifies as cost leaders. Robustness checks provide evidence that these effects, estimated with 1990–1993 data, continue to hold with 1996–2009 data.
In addition to providing results consistent with advertising effectiveness being moderated by firm strategy, this study provides evidence that the proposed indicator of firm strategy is reliable and valid using evidence about indicator stability, “realized strategy indicators” from firms’ financial statements, and TMT composition.
Furthermore, by developing a secondary data–based indicator of a firm's source of competitive advantage, we extend the marketing literature, which has hitherto relied on primary, survey-based measures of differentiation (Homburg, Workman, and Krohmer 1999). We anticipate that this measure of a firm's source of competitive advantage will be useful to marketing scholars in examining research questions that pertain to publicly listed firms.
We also note that our indicator gives no information about the source of competitive advantage for the 63% of firms that did not disclose advertising pre-FRR44. Although it is likely that many such firms are cost leaders, it is also likely that some of those firms differentiate but build their intangible, market-based assets through mechanisms other than advertising.10 (Business-to-business firms, such as Boeing, may develop intangible, market-based assets through their selling organizations, rather than through advertising. Similarly, technology firms, such as Cisco, might develop intangible, market-based assets based on research and development, rather than advertising.)
We conclude that researchers analyzing data from public financial reports need to be mindful of potential change in firms’ advertising disclosure behavior that might have resulted from FRR44. Studies restricted to firms that report advertising expenditure should account for sample differences pre- and post-1994. Studies that analyze advertising expenditure with post-1994 data (which covers only the less than 40% of publicly traded firms that disclose their expenditure) should acknowledge and account for the fact that their analysis includes only firms that draw competitive advantage from differentiation. Researchers who wish to study the impact of marketing with a more representative, post-1994 set of firms might drop advertising expenditure as a predictor and, instead, use the indicator developed in this study as a proxy for the marketing focus of differentiators.
Managerial Implications
This study's findings have implications for financial regulators, who, in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ (1993) Statement of Position 93-7, mandated that all advertising expenditure be expensed when incurred. Implicit in that mandate was the assumption that advertising's impact is limited to the period in which the advertising is done, that is, that advertising does not build intangible assets whose influence will be felt for many periods to come. Regulators were probably influenced in their choice of this rather conservative accounting treatment by the conflicting results in the accounting literature. If it is the case, as we have argued, that (post-FRR44) a firm only discloses advertising if that firm's advertising builds firm value, then it is exactly those firms that are currently obliged to disclose advertising expenditure that should be capitalizing that expenditure and adding the resulting asset to the firm's balance sheet. We contend that for firms that draw competitive advantage from differentiation, moving advertising from an income statement expense to a balance sheet asset would better represent a firm's asset base. Such a move would reinforce C-suite executives’ view of advertising as the creator of intangible value that can be cut back only if the firm is willing to accept negative effects on its shareholder value.
The study's findings also generate implications for marketing practice. First, the findings suggest that managers should realize that drawing competitive advantage from cost leadership, versus differentiation, has important implications for the effectiveness of a firm's advertising. A differentiator's accumulated brand equity will cause that firm to expect higher sales and higher firm value than that of an otherwise equivalent cost leader.
Second, the differentiator–versus–cost leader dichotomy might correspond to the dichotomous roles for the marketing function documented by Booz Allen Hamilton and the Association of National Advertisers. Through a series of studies (Hyde, Landry, and Tipping 2004; Landry, Tipping, and Dixon 2005; Landry, Tipping and Kumar 2006), they characterize marketing's role as either “growth driver” or “advisor/service provider.” When the marketing function is the growth driver in a firm (which probably implies that the firm differentiates), these studies tell us that the marketing function is the typical career path to general management; marketing executives control budgets for brands, media, and innovation; and senior marketing executives partner with the chief executive officer to propel the firm's growth agenda. When the marketing function is an advisor or service provider in the firm (which probably implies that the firm is a cost leader), marketing rarely has budget authority or oversight of strategy or product management and is more likely to be tasked with ensuring corporate trademark and brand guideline compliance or coordinating the sharing of best practices across business units. Understanding these differences in the role of marketing in firms that differentiate versus in firms that are cost leaders, and being able to make inferences about that role according to the firm's advertising disclosure behavior, could be useful to candidates evaluating marketing job offers at different firms and to consultants who wish to target firms with a strong marketing emphasis.
Finally, we note that most marketing textbooks, when introducing the marketing career path, overlook the implications of a firm's business strategy for that career path. The marketing function is frequently presented as the growth driver, with budgetary authority and a clear path to general management that one might expect in a firm that differentiates. If, in fact, marketing is cast in the role of growth driver only in that 40% of publicly traded firms that differentiate, some students may find themselves working at firms that are cost leaders, where marketing responsibilities and career opportunities of the marketing job they accept differ significantly from the responsibilities and career opportunities that their marketing textbooks led them to expect.
In the analysis of firms’ TMT makeup, we show that marketing's influence is greater in differentiators than in cost leaders. This might explain why examples in marketing textbooks almost exclusively feature differentiating firms. Although financial reporting requirements cause the finance function to be present on virtually all TMTs, the finance function plays a more robust managerial role in a cost leader (where finance's controls are key) than in a differentiator (where finance supports brand managers).
